I suppose it was true to the kind of thinking that
was prevalent in the early planning movement in
the country, and in El Paso as well, that some of the
elements of the Kessler plan had to do with
aesthetics as much as anything else. Some of the
thinking in the plan regarding submerging the
railroad tracks that cross the center of the city,
which had a functional merit in terms of improving
traffic through the downtown and had an aesthetic
benefit in cleaning up that section of the city.
These kinds of things were incorporated in there.
For the period in which it was done, it was probably
a wise and a very useful plan. Together with that
plan, the initial basic structure of the planning
within the city was established with the
appointment of a plan commission. The city still
retains that name. We have a city plan commission
as though we had still that one plan that we were
following. I suppose as a shortcoming to that plan
and to the early planning thinking, there was less
thought given to the overall traffic and
transportation layout within the developing
areas of the city. And the city went for some time
without really good articulation of a
circulation pattern.
Furthermore, some of the growth areas of the city
were not well thought out in terms of how they would
relate to the inner core of the city. The Kessler
plan spoke very much to the developed area of the
community and tried to enhance the livability of
aspects of the city as it existed then. The growth
which followed, particularly as the city entered
that very accelerated growth curve in the 50s,
initially began to move without a lot of good local
planning thinking. There was borrowing from some
of the kind of subdivision design and such that was
available and known from other communities, but
it had no signature saying this is the way El Paso
should develop. It certainly was not being guided
by the central management of the city government.
I think probably the most significant thing that
happened during the period of the 50s and early 60s
was the beginning of the articulation of a
circulation pattern within the community. The
designation of certain streets as major
thoroughfares, the planned extension of them,
the incorporation of standards regarding
useful and necessary right-of-way widths and
paving widths. As a shortcoming to that thinking,
all those standards could be listed in plans and
plan documents. I think although there was a lot of
contribution made to the city's development in
the way of The thinking on the transportation
system and the street network, you could
criticize that whole period as to say that due to
politics, due to funding limitations, due to
inability to coordinate development among
different governmental jurisdictions, notably
the city and the school district, many things kind
of went their own way. There was not a good program
to acquire park park sites. There was not
development
of a good neighborhood concept with the
relationship of a school and park space and
residential areas. There were many shortcomings
and probably during the period of the post-war
growth boom began, a long certain highways that
served at that time as the almost sole
transportation route. The inevitable
development of strip commercial
uses, the strip commercial pattern that
today, I realize this is practically true to any
city, but it always seems terribly unfortunate,
the hodgepodge pattern of commercial uses on
small lots and their signs. It speaks very poorly
of a city's image of itself and it perhaps would be a
valid criticism of the thinking during that
period that the body politic didn't see reason to
try to arrest the ugliest parts of those
developments and create a more pleasing
community image that would be evidence from
traveling along those highways. This was the
immediate post-World War II era. Immediate
post-World War II era that saw doubling the
population of the city and some of the most land
extensive development that the community had
ever seen at that time. And then when the street
pattern became involved with the interstate
system. The interstate system surely has to be
this and any other community, I'm sure. It has, it
changed It changed everything. Carving up
neighborhoods, defining new transportation
routes, creating intersections of importance
and enabling the city to grow in directions that
never had done so before because of the increase in
travel time.
When we look at planning in any community, we have
to think of the decisions made by those
transportation types that lay out interstate
highways and decide where the interchanges will
be and realize that their decisions have probably
more long-reaching implications than much of
what's done by what we term the real planners. It's
more, I guess, the planners have to understand and
fully realize the implications of such things All
too often, I suppose no one really does, at least
during that period, as the interstate system
began to be implemented in the late 50s, that the
far-reaching implications of it were not fully
thought out. Although I don't think the city
suffers so much from that. The interstate system
in particular opened up the east side of El Paso,
the upper escarpment, a very flat desert mesa that
overlooks part of the Rio Grande Valley. It opened
it up, and today it still continues to outstrip the
rest of the community in its growth. Because of its
more recent development, it does have a
relatively well-articulated street network
arterial pattern. As I noted earlier, it has
rather dearth of open space.
In many ways, I suppose it looks like every other
community. There still is not a true southwestern
or El Paso signature on that development, as there
could have been. Going back for a minute to the
Kessler plan, Mike, my reading of it surprised me
because he doesn't talk about land use patterns.
No, he doesn't. No, he doesn't. It's circulation,
including the railroad and parks and so forth, but
in terms of basic land use patterns, it's absent.
No, it's rather unfortunate that even when the
city first established zoning ordinances and
such, there didn't seem to be a lot of very weighty
thinking given to land use patterns. The initial
charge, which was given to the city planning
commission, which was created shortly after the
Kessler plan was created, spoke almost
exclusively of overseeing public investment.
the capital improvements the community would
make, and to assure that they fit within the plan.
And it doesn't really speak to the role of the
commission as a body recommending to the elected
leaders changes in the pattern of the community's
development from a land use perspective. And that
was probably the vacuum which created
development patterns which we now look back at and
use terms like blighted and such because it It
wasn't properly controlled in that period. One
thing I wanted to ask you about particularly is the
work that you did when you were in the planning
department on the Secundo Barrio.
South El Paso, I'm sure some of the other
interviewees have talked about the planning that
was done during the Chamazal boundary
relocation. It's just been mentioned, but not in
any detail. It might serve as an introduction to
the South El Paso problem. The Rio Grande River
forms the international boundary. By the Treaty
of Guadalupe Hidalgo, it is the boundary between
the United States and Mexico. It follows the
center line of the river. As the river changes and
shifts course, the boundary moves with it with two
provisions, whether that change is created by
accretion, the slow movement and change of the
river channel, or whether it's created by a sudden
shift, in which case the boundary remains
unchanged. And it appears that in the 1860s, more
or less, there was a flood that through avulsion,
that sudden change or shift of the river's course
should have changed the international boundary.
However, the United States failed to acknowledge
it. It remained at a sore point between the United
States and Mexico for many years until the Kennedy
administration, when the administration chose
to try to address that problem. It became a rather
unique situation in first physically relocating
the river second massive acquisition of
properties on the US side to then be ceded to
Mexico. And in the course of that, although there
was, I suppose, I don't remember the numbers
exactly, I think approximately 450 acres of land
in the United States was ceded to Mexico and
another 250 to 300 acres from Mexico became part of
the United States. This was in the very center core
of the city, an area that land values and
development patterns were very intense.
There was an opportunity on the part of the United
States to make use of the land acquired to create
some, a number of things were done, improvements
in the transportation pattern through the
beginning of the first leg of a highway
paralleling the river. The acquisition of open
space that today is the Chalmazal Memorial and the
site of many important community events in the way
of festivals for one thing or another and drama
theaters and such. The improvement bringing up to
standard the relocation of a high school that was
in a very crowded congested site that offered
little in the way of outdoor play area and It today
is fully compatible with any of the newest high
schools in the city in terms of its quality, in
terms of the amount of space that's devoted to it,
splinters of land that became available for
public housing. A number of different things were
done there on the land acquired from Mexico on the
U.S. side that was good and notable. On the land
that was ceded to Mexico, however, there was
massive relocation necessary, the relocation of
literally thousands of people. This is... The
land that was involved in this immediately
parallels the border. Historically, it's been
the site of housing for some of the poorest
residents of the city, persons who have Hispanic
heritage, persons who still have ties, family
ties and economic ties with Mexico. Although
stereotypes are always dangerous, it could be
stereotyped to say that certain neighborhoods
within there represent, in essence, first
generation of the newer immigrants,
particularly from Mexico.
These are persons who had the ambition to come
across, whose skills and education limits them in
terms of their economic ability, but they retain
many of the kind of attitudes of what a
neighborhood should be from their Mexican
heritage, and it tends to be very close-knit
neighborhoods with intricate social
organization, people whose associations are
determined based on who lives in the next three
blocks. From a sociological perspective, this
probably are the only two neighborhoods in El Paso
that people really tend to interrelate as a
sociologist believes they should. Well, it was
right in this area that mass relocation was
necessary. There
were things done during that period that, at the
insistence of John Cunningham, the then city
planning director, that assistance be provided
beyond the basic minimum compensation that the
constitutional mandate would give for persons
who had to be displaced, particularly those
renters, to ensure that we didn't take a man of
limited means and suddenly throw his life you
know, totally out of whack and do more harm than
anything else to the individual. In any case, this
relocation was accomplished in a relatively
short period. And what followed then was a very
sharply defined border along the area that
between the downtowns of El Paso and Juarez, there
remained this neighborhood that is just
generally referred to as South El Paso, or
sometimes Segundo Barrio, Segundo meaning
second. It was the second ward back when the city in
its early days had five voting wards, barrio being
a Spanish term for neighborhood. The
housing patterns in there that had not been
touched by the channel relocation of the river,
were some of the most intensively developed and
populated sections of the city. Tenements
remained there from that period I spoke of earlier
when the Mexican Revolution was going on and there
was a massive influx of citizens. Tenement
buildings that offered two rooms and no indoor
plumbing,
typically two-story brick buildings. that very
tightly spaced together. I suppose all in all, in
that half square mile of the community that's
called South El Paso, there was a population of
roughly 25,000 people. And that density may not
seem... To understand that density, you also have
to understand that you'd seldom find a building
over two stories anywhere in that area. This was a
case of people packed together not only on the
land, but within the physical confines, the rooms
they lived in, the rooms of their dwelling units
and everything else. Everything was very tightly
packed.
In the early 70s,
spurred on in part by a change in some federal
programs, there was a move on the part of the city to
address the housing problem in there. the
particular change in the programs I speak of, the
public housing, which the city initially had
several public housing units built. There had
been very little new public housing built in the
city for some years. The mandate from the
Department of Housing and Urban Development was
that the city would have to adopt a housing code,
number one, and have to adopt it in a real sense by
having a workable program for such code
enforcement. to arrest the blight and
substandard housing conditions that existed.
Who took the leadership role in providing public
housing in El Paso, would you say?
I couldn't honestly say. Where did that begin?
What was the pressure for it?
I couldn't honestly say whether it came from the
administration or within the planning
department or within the housing authority which
had been in existence now for almost 15, 20 years
and exactly where the pressure came to diligently
go after the funds that were available for new
public housing. I know that part of the El Paso's
never had a redevelopment agency. No, the Urban
Renewal Authority has been put before the
citizens on three different occasions and
suddenly defeated on three different times. And
yet it's had a housing authority for quite a while.
It had its earliest housing unit, I think, traces
to 1948. Again,
I can't really answer your question where that
initial impetus to pursue the public funds
available for where new housing came from. But I do
know that the charge then to make it work fell onto
city staff, two departments, notably the public
inspection department and the city planning
department. It was determined, a policy
decision, it was determined that that code
enforcement would be concentrated in south El
Paso, the area that was known and acknowledged to
have the worst housing conditions in the city.
Kessler noted that in his plan as well. It's been
around the city for a long time. And it still
exists. It still is a problem in that area. The
attitude of the public inspection department was
to make an inventory of the housing stock in there
and select the worst housing units for
demolition. And this was somewhat at odds with the
thinking of the city planning staff who thought it
better to Since if you simply want to categorize
what does not meet code, 80% of all the structures
down there would be outside of not in code
compliance, but rather to concentrate in given
areas where the land that would be made available
for new development based on the demolition then
could constitute big enough parcel sizes to allow
for useful redevelopment. The city planners
didn't win out on that. The code enforcement
people did. I
do not know the numbers right off hand. There were a
number of these housing units, these tenements,
which were destroyed. There are people relocated
into public housing, which, in keeping with the
thinking of the day, was
trying not to concentrate persons through public
policy and assisted housing. These housing units
were scattered across the city.
There were a number of things the planners at the
time were rather upset about, but the
pressures were all coming from somewhere else.
The public housing officials, the code
enforcement people, as I said, wanted to target
what they considered to be the worst housing
units. It created a pattern like a pox across the
neighborhood where lots sometimes as little as 25
feet wide and 125 feet long. became available.
They were vacant, but they were still built up on
either side. There was really no opportunity for a
redevelopment based on these parcel sizes that
were being made available. The relocation
patterns of the residents, there was really no
thinking about what was going on there in the way of
taking a very intricate social network that
existed in that neighborhood, a true
sociological neighborhood, as I pointed out
earlier, and trying to preserve that intact,
where persons with
social ties would be relocated to areas that would
enable them to maintain those social ties, or
relocated as groups. Rather, this was in keeping
with national standards. The elderly were put in
elderly housing, and families were put in family
housing, And it began to destroy part of what the
Hispanic neighborhood, which was more of a
mixture of different age groups. With their
particular institutions. Exactly. And in some
cases, these public housing units which were
created in here, it really didn't accomplish the
federal mandate at all of trying to deconcentrate
the minority groups. There were public housing
units. We're talking about families with numbers
of children and something that there was no
private housing which would meet their needs. The
public housing which was necessary for this often
was four and five bedroom units typically within
the complexes. And some of these multi-bedroom
units were constructed in complexes located in
otherwise distant locations, elite
neighborhoods, but lacking walking distance to
shopping, lacking good public transportation,
and built in concentrations of sometimes as many
as 600 units, which we began to multiply the units
by the number of bedrooms, by the potential
population. There are complexes which easily you
have over 1,500 people, all relocated from the
same basic area. which now becomes an enclave of
poverty in otherwise a neighborhood that sees no
relationship with it. The social integration
hasn't been accomplished because of this. But
what happened in south El Paso is that where the
attitude had always been rather passive in terms
of the role of the government as it affected their
livelihood, an attitude of don't make waves, the
militancy began to emerge among the
neighborhood. They had seen, through public
policy, their neighborhood cut the population in
half with the result of scattered vacant parcels
all through the neighborhood. They had not seen
good and wise development come in to follow it.
Rather, sometimes the remnants of foundations
left on there, it became just a opportunity for
other kinds of social problems of petty crime and
gathering places for vagrants and such. They knew
of their family members who now were relocated to
distant parts of the city and were living in far
superior housing but were completely unhappy
because of what had happened to their lifestyle
and lifestyle pattern. And it was in 1975 more or
less that at the instruction of John Cunningham, I
worked with some of the staff in trying to once
again prepare a study and a program of
improvements for the area to try to address the
problems of, particularly the ongoing problems
of the continued magnitude of the substandard
housing and concentration of the poor that exist
in South El Paso. And what we encountered was
considerable resistance from the neighborhood.
Suspicion that there was really a secret plan to
remove all the residents, that we really wanted
just to commercialize all of it. We didn't care
about their needs. Contrary to federal mandates
about social integration and relocating the poor
to better class neighborhoods to encourage, as I
said, social economic integration, These people
didn't want to leave, and they made that point as
many times, that they were quite happy with the
neighborhood that existed as it existed, and they
wanted the housing problem addressed as it
existed. I think as a young intern working on my
degree, I was down here and I was encountering the
trenches of citizen participation for the first
time. Didn't find a very placid, meek population
sitting down there and waiting until
presentations were concluded to then politely
ask questions. I was working with small groups
that were shaking their fist and walking out of
meetings and making threats. And people were
quite unhappy. And also, maybe I began to see some
of the weakness of meetings per se as I I began to
encounter that there were different attitudes in
the neighborhood. There were some very militant
youth groups that would make as though they
represented all the people in the area, who in fact
didn't, but they would lobby very effectively at
public meetings that were held to make it seem as
though the overall consensus of the neighborhood
was in keeping with their particular notions of
what should happen.
As I said, I was here on an internship. I didn't see
even that particular program to its completion. I
saw the different elements as they began to come
together. And later, when I worked with the
planning staff again, the programs had different
names and things of thinking. The problems never
really changed. But it's taken a long way to come
around to it was finally happening. through a
combination of perhaps less conservative
thinking on the part of our local attorneys who had
real great problems with any public money being
spent to benefit a private citizen in the way of
housing, rehabilitating housing. Changes in the
way of federal monies that became available
through the Community Development Program. Just
changes of those that they seem, of no great
significance, but had great significance to us.
The funds that we had available for improving the
neighborhood almost entirely were limited to
doing the things that we did need to do. Improving
drainage and parks and putting more street lights
and well that's all fine and good, but the problem
was and always is and always was housing. Terribly
substandard housing. Clearly the what was
necessary wasn't a continued wholesale
destruction of a neighborhood and relocation of
persons to distant parts of the city. And finally,
only in more recent times, a number of different
programs come about where instead of tearing down
units and building our monotonous public
housing, we're making money available so that
different organizations, be they private
landlords, property owners that can go in and
rehabilitate housing, different nonprofit
corporations made up of one notable organization
I can think of is a group of ex-students from the
local high school, the Bully exes, they call
themselves. How do you spell that? Bully, as in
Bully High School, named after Jim Bully,
ironically. I can tell you stories about Bully
High School, too, and its social significance in
the area, but I mean, as a group of persons, an
ex-students association composed of persons who
grew up essentially in that neighborhood coming
back and acquiring tenements and renovating them
into standard units and then together with
management contracts with public housing making
them available at subsidized rates so they
continue to be affordable for the people there.
Money that we've supplied to non-profit
corporations which have created They have built
new housing and remodeled housing and then sell it
on a, it becomes, rather than a condominium, it
becomes a co-op of housing where you have an
undivided interest in the whole complex. We've
been able to do, I think, more good in the area that
way than anything else by not going in there and
thinking we have to tear it all down and build it in a
model of something that in our middle class minds
we see is the way a neighborhood should look but
taking the resources that already exist, good
stable brick buildings which have lasted for 50
years and taking them, remodeling them, making
them into carving standard housing out of them and
working with the programs that are available to
keep them affordable for the people that would
choose to remain in the area and So that perhaps, in
a sense, the complexion of the area hasn't
changed. Appearance-wise, things have not all of
a sudden been drastically altered. But what we've
done is finally go in there and address the housing
problem that really exists. And it's a long road to
hoe in it. There's still many, many tenants down
there that don't meet any codes that you could
think of anywhere.
We're beginning to finally make a dent in it,
though. Like I say, it'll be many, many years
before we can even think we've finally really come
close to an end, but I think we're finally moving in
the right direction, and maybe as an indicator of
that, what I encountered in that neighborhood in
the way of militancy and resistance is more or less
gone away, and there's more of an attitude of trust
and cooperation now as we finally have a housing
program which is seen by all parties as being
responsive to the neighborhood's needs. Does the
planning department have Spanish-speaking
planners as liaison to that project? Very
definitely, very definitely. In fact, I was one of
the few people that was allowed down in the
neighborhood that couldn't speak Spanish.
Something which, on a very different subject,
we're talking about different
categories of thinking that have planning
significance in El Paso. One element that's only
beginning to unfold right now is a change of the
attitude of the community regarding the
mountains, which bisect the city. These poor
mountains have been ravaged for all kinds of crazy
things from almost time immemorial. People have
had the craziest notions of building giant clocks
on top of them and roads right down the ridge line
and one thing or another. It wasn't a lot of
attitude on the part of the city of really caring
for the mountains. All in all, the rough terrain of
the mountains, it didn't allow for a lot of
development. It didn't allow for the properties
to be developed economically. And so outside of
the high school's pain there, their school
initials on the mountains, and radio towers
putting their transmitting towers on top of the
mountain. Not a lot happened on the mountains
themselves, and they remained pretty much as they
always had been. Well, land development
techniques change over time, and more recently
the development of some very difficult terrain is
becoming economically feasible. People that
would be inclined to do so would provide a market
for elite housing that offered a spectacular view
by being built into the mountain itself. And
there's been a growing awareness on the part of the
community that the mountain, almost every inch of
it was privately owned and not protected from
anything that could happen. This led some years
back to the acquisition politicking on the part of
the local legislators from the El Paso area to
encourage the state to acquire much of this
mountain and designate it as a wilderness park.
And this, in fact, is being done. But there remains
much mountainous terrain, particularly in the
southernmost third of the mountain that lies
within the very densely developed core of the city
itself that is still in private hands, that there
is a growing development pressure for it. And I
find it noteworthy in the sense that through a lot
of meetings and studies and the adoption of
ordinances and now continuing changes to the
ordinance, the city is beginning to try to do
something which can't be readily borrowed from
just any city anywhere. And that's to define if the
mountain areas are developed, how should they be
developed? How can we preserve the character of
the mountain yet still allow the terrain to be
developed? The city has never, they've only
recently incorporated site plan review as a
condition of billing permit as part of their of
certain zoning classifications.
We have to go. Come on. In any case,
some planning thinking is having to be put to focus
on a problem which is rather unique to communities
such as El Paso that do have mountains terrain that
is intended and can be developed. And it's created
a new challenge for some of the planning staff
which was accustomed to studying plans on
two-dimensional maps to have to begin to think
three-dimensionally.
So many of the physical implications of
development patterns and what that does to the
aesthetics and livability and all the other
physical implications that go along with
Drainage patterns and traffic patterns are
beginning to have to be looked at quite
closely. General principles can be identified,
but the specific standards have been very
elusive. The staff is only now beginning to come up
with some workable solutions. It's not something
which I can point to in the city and say, look at what
has been accomplished. I'd rather only highlight
that as something that is ongoing right now. And I
don't have a lot of good examples of ordinances and
policies which have been adopted. I can show you
maybe some of the bad examples and mistakes that
have been made. But I think it's interesting from a
planning perspective only in that it is a
relatively unique situation that the kind of
planning I think is best, a very localized
an individual kind of solution has to be sought so
that you apply not the standards that you get out of
national publications, but the principles that
govern planning to bring them to bear on a unique
and very community-oriented problem. We've
already mentioned Kessler and Cunningham. Are
there any other major personalities that have
affected planning in El Paso? Mayors or planners
themselves
private groups
I can't really give you a chronology of the
different personalities that have been involved
in the directorship itself outside of the more
recent period when I knew John Cunningham and
interim director Bill Adams and now current
director Nestor Valencia
there have been Have there been any private
citizen groups that have been influential in
supporting planning? El Paso remains a city that
community groups, neighborhood organizations
and such, they spring up usually on an
issue-oriented basis. They have one particular
axe to grind, and all too often they disappear once
that issue, the immediate crisis, is passed. And I
think there would have been, there would be a lot
more interesting examples of good planning had
there been the pressure from the community and the
neighborhood organizations on an ongoing basis
that unfortunately has been lacking all too
often. No continuity. Not really, not really.
That continuity, the lack of continuity of
leadership within the community itself rather
than of elected, of city officials themselves. is
perhaps something that's held back plenty.
Although you have had a series of mayors who have
been very supportive of planning. Yes, on
occasion we've had mayors, some very
conservative, who had the attitude that federal
money was tainted with tainted money and should be
avoided at all costs. The most important thing was
to hold down taxes and never pass a tax approval,
and consequently there were very few in the way of
capital improvements done either through
locally generated revenue or through program
monies available through the federal
government. There have been other mayors who took
a more active role. Mayor Judson Williams
comes to mind as a person who was really interested
in seeing some of the elements of the city progress
in terms of planning and thinking. I believe he was
the mayor during the period of the Chamazal Treaty
being hashed out.
All too often, though, I think the, like I said,
it's a parochial and rather conservative city,
and so there's not been a lot of, the citizens
themselves don't give a strong mandate to the
elected leaders to pursue different planning
goals and consequently the leadership hasn't
hasn't pushed new planning directions frontiers
taking a look at the future what do you think are the
major problems that el paso planning is going to
have to address
water usage water it has to be one of the most
critical issues in the city We've covered that in
other interviews. Any other issues?
I would think one thing that has to be faced up to
is the changing complexion of the city from an
economic standpoint that has rather negative
implications into the future. The city is
becoming increasingly a manufacturing center.
And increasingly, the white collar staff, the
headquarters operations
are disappearing. There's a real danger that the
city can become one dimensional in the future in
the sense of having too many industries that
employ apparel industries, for instance, that
employ people that need no more training than
necessary to sew zippers on blue jeans and too
little of the management staff in the future this
may create in essence a leadership vacuum as the
persons with the greatest incomes are the plant
managers for the large national companies who owe
no local allegiance to the community are here only
as a stepping stone to other positions and to And
then, of course, your problems with Mexico and the
two economies rubbing shoulders every day. It's
been one thing that has been very successful in
this area, the Maquiladora program, the twin
plants that enable industry in Mexico to work with
industry in the United States to do parcel
assembly of items, electronic components, and
such, that later then are shipped into the US for
export. Different tariff laws and things like
that that are changed to allow for this. It's
created giant industrial parks on the Mexican
side that have improved the standard of living in
lettuce in particular, and have created their
counterpart development in the United States, in
El Paso in particular. We see some of the final
assembly. We see, of course, a lot of warehousing
and such. That, in a sense, is rather positive. It
is provided, although it is creating other
population pressures by virtue of continued
immigration of some of the rural area Mexicans to
the urban area around Juarez with hope of getting
their slice of the economic pie, which never grows
as fast as the population seems to. Any other basic
issues that are going to have to be faced by
clients?
I think El Paso, like many cities, we're finally
beginning to see a slowing down of the peripheral
fringe of the community and a reawakening of the
value of some of the built up areas of the
community. and the real public concern over some
of the old neighborhoods with their Corinthian
column decorated homes that are being destroyed.
And it's a challenge from a planning perspective
of how to redevelop and how to renew and how to
restore some of the quality of life in the built-up
area of the city has just a totally different
social makeup than when it was originally
created. It's not as easy to point out areas in El
Paso where you find the so-called
gentrification. You find more areas that the
homes have been subdivided into, grand old homes
have been subdivided into five apartments, and
the complexion of the neighborhood now is
entirely a Hispanic community of very modest
economic means, and it's beset with problems of
crime and the air pollution which hangs over the
city, yet there's a physical resource there which
is being lost. And there's a genuine community
concern over trying to salvage that. And you've
got to realize the economics and social fabric
that exists there now and see how that can best be
integrated with the physical resource which does
exist. That would be a planning challenge now and
into the future.
Ed, thanks very much. If you can think of anything
to add to this when we get the transcription to you,
feel free to add or delete. Thank you very much.